!CHAPTERDATA|2|The Cow|In the name of the most merciful God.
A. L. M.
There is no doubt in this book; it is a direction to the pious,
who believe in the mysteries of faith, who observe the appointed times of prayer, and distribute alms out of what We have bestowed on them;
and who believe in that revelation, which hath been sent down unto thee, and that which hath been sent down unto the prophets before thee, and have firm assurance in the life to come:
these are directed by their Lord, and they shall prosper.
As for the unbelievers, it will be equal to them whether thou admonish them, or do not admonish them; they will not believe.
God hath sealed up their hearts and their hearing; a dimness covereth their sight, and they shall suffer a grievous punishment.
There are some who say, We believe in God, and the last day; but are not really believers:
they seek to deceive God, and those who do believe, but they deceive themselves only, and are not sensible thereof.
There is an infirmity in their hearts, and God hath increased that infirmity; and they shall suffer a most painful punishment, because they have disbelieved.
When one saith unto them, act not corruptly in the earth; they reply, Verily we are men of integrity.
Are not they themselves corrupt doers? But they are not sensible thereof.
And when one saith unto them, believe ye as others believe; they answer, shall we believe as fools believe? Are not they themselves fools? But they know it not.
When they meet those who believe, they say, we do believe: But when they retire privately to their devils, they say, we really hold with you, and only mock at those people:
God shall mock at them, and continue them in their impiety; they shall wander in confusion.
These are the men who have purchased error at the price of true direction: But their traffick hath not been gainful, neither have they been rightly directed.
They are like unto one who kindleth a fire, and when it hath enlightened all around him; God taketh away their light and leaveth them in darkness, they shall not see;
they are deaf, dumb, and blind, therefore will they not repent.
Or like a stormy cloud from heaven, fraught with darkness, thunder, and lightning, they put their fingers in their ears, because of the noise of the thunder, for fear of death; God encompasseth the infidels:
the lightning wanteth but little of taking away their sight; so often as it enlighteneth them, they walk therein, but when darkness cometh on them, they stand still; and if God so pleased, he would certainly deprive them of their hearing and their sight, for God is almighty.
O men of Mecca serve your Lord who hath created you, and those who have been before you peradventure ye will fear Him;
who hath spread the earth as a bed for you, and the heaven as a covering, and hath caused water to descend from heaven, and thereby produced fruits for your sustenance. Set not up therefore any equals unto God, against your own knowledge.
If ye be in doubt concerning that revelation which We have sent down unto our servant, produce a chapter like unto it, and call upon your witnesses, besides God, if ye say truth.
But if ye do it not, nor shall ever be able to do it; justly fear the fire whose fewel is men and stones, prepared for the unbeliebers.
But bear good tidings unto those who believe, and do good works, that they shall have gardens watered by rivers; so often as they eat of the fruit thereof for sustenance, they shall say, this is what we have formerly eaten of; and they shall be supplied with several sorts of fruit having a mutual resemblance to one another. There shall they enjoy wives subject to no impurity, and there shall they continue for ever.
Moreover God will not be ashamed to propound in a parable a gnat, or even a more despicable thing; for they who believe will know it to be the truth from their Lord; but the unbelievers will say, What meaneth God by this parable? He will thereby mislead many, and will direct many thereby: but He will not mislead any thereby, except the transgressors,
who make void the covenant of God after the establishing thereof, and cut in sunder that which God hath commanded to be joined, and act corruptly in the earth; they shall perish.
How is it that ye believe not in God? Since ye were dead, and He gave you life; He will hereafter cause you to die, and will again restore you to life; then shall ye return unto Him.
It is He who hath created for you whatsoever is on earth, and then set his mind to the creation of heaven, and formed it into seven heavens; He knoweth all things.
When thy Lord said unto the angels, I am going to place a substitute on earth; they said, Wilt thou place there one who will do evil therein, and shed blood? But we celebrate thy praise, and sanctify Thee. God answered, verily I know that which ye know not;
and He taught Adam the names of all things, and then proposed them to the angels, and said, declare unto Me the names of these things if ye say truth.
They answered, praise be unto thee, we have no knowledge but what Thou teachest us, for Thou art knowing and wise.
God said, O Adam, tell them their names. And when he had told them their names, God said, did I not tell you that I know the secrets of heaven and earth, and know that which ye discover, and that which ye conceal?
And when We said unto the angels, worship Adam; they all worshipped him, except Eblis who refused, and was puffed up with pride, and became of the number of unbelievers.
And We said, O Adam, dwell thou and thy wife in the garden, and eat of the fruit thereof plentifully wherever ye will; but approach not this tree, lest ye become of the number of the transgressors.
But Satan caused them to forfeit paradise, and turned them out of the state of happiness wherein they had been; whereupon We said, get ye down, the one of you an enemy unto the other, and there shall be a dwelling place for you in earth, and a provision for a season.
And Adam learned words of prayer from his Lord, and God turned unto him, for He is easy to be reconciled and merciful.
We said, get ye all down from hence; hereafter shall there come unto you a direction from me, and whoever shall follow my direction, on them shall no fear come, neither shall they be grieved;
but they who shall be unbelievers, and accuse our signs of falsehood, they shall be the companions of hell fire, therein shall they remain for ever.
O children of Israel, remember my favour wherewith I have favoured you; and perform your covenant with me, and I will perform my covenant with you; and revere me:
and believe in the revelation which I have sent down, confirming that which is with you, and be not the first who believe not therein, neither exchange my signs for a small price; and fear me.
Cloath not the truth with vanity, neither conceal the truth against your own knowledge;
observe the stated times of prayer, and pay your legal alms, and bow down yourselves with those who bow down.
Will ye command men to do justice, and forget your own souls? Yet ye read the book of the law: Do ye not therefore understand?
Ask help with perseverance and prayer; this indeed is grievous, unless to the humble,
who seriously think they shall meet their Lord, and that to Him they shall return.
O children of Israel, remember my favour wherewith I have favoured you, and that I have preferred you above all nations:
Dread the day wherein one soul shall not make satisfaction for another soul, neither shall any intercession be accepted from them, nor shall any compensation be received, neither shall they be helped.
Remember when we delivered you from the people of Pharaoh, who grievously oppressed you, they slew your male children, and let your females live: Therein was a great trial from your Lord.
And when we divided the sea for you and delivered you, and drowned Pharaoh's people while ye looked on.
And when we treated with Moses forty nights; then ye took the calf for your God, and did evil;
yet afterwards we forgave you, that preadventure ye might give thanks.
And when we gave Moses the book of the law, and the distinction between good and evil, that peradventure ye might be directed.
And when Moses said unto his people, O my people, verily ye have injured your own souls, by your taking the calf for your God; therefore be turned unto your Creator, and slay those among you who have been guilty of that crime; this will be better for you in the sight of your Creator; and thereupon He turned unto you, for He is easy to be reconciled, and merciful.
And when ye said, O Moses, we will not believe thee, untill we see God manifestly; therefore a punishment came upon you, while ye looked on;
then we raised you to life after ye had been dead, that peradventure ye might give thanks.
And We caused clouds to overshadow you, and manna and quails to descend upon you, saying, eat of the food things which We have given you for food: And they injured not Us, but injured their own souls.
And when We said, enter into this city, and eat of the provisions thereof plentifully as ye will; and enter the gate worshipping, and say, forgiveness! We will pardon you your sins, and give increase unto the well-doers.
But the ungodly changed the expression into another, different from what had been spoken unto them; and we sent down upon the ungodly indignation from heaven, because they had transgressed.
And when Moses asked drink for his people, We said, strike the rock with thy rod; and there gushed thereout twelve fountains according to the number of the tribes, and all men knew their respective drinking-place. Eat and drink of the bounty of God, and commit not evil in the earth, acting unjustly.
And when ye said, O Moses, we will by no means be satisfied with one kind of food; pray unto thy Lord therefore for us, that He would produce for us of that which the earth bringeth forth, herbs, and cucumbers, and garlick, and lentils, and onions; Moses answered, will ye exchange that which is better, for that which is worse? Get ye down in Egypt, for there shall ye find what ye desire: And they were smitten with vileness and misery, and drew on themselves indignation from God. This they suffered, because they believed not in the signs of God, and killed the prophets unjustly; this, because they rebelled and transgressed.
Surely those who believe, and those who Judaize, and Christians, and Sabians, whoever believeth in God, and the last day, and doth that which is right, they shall have their reward with their Lord, there shall come no fear on them, neither shall they be grieved.
Call to mind also when we accepted your covenant, and lifted up the mountain of Sinai over you, saying, receive the law which we have given you, with a resolution to keep it, and remember that which is contained therein, that ye may beware.
After this ye again turned back, so that if it had not been for God's indulgence and mercy towards you, ye had certainly been destroyed.
Moreover ye know what befall those of your nation who transgressed on the sabbath day; we said unto them, be ye changed into apes, driven away from the society of men.
And we made them an example unto those who were contemporary with them, and unto those who came after them, and a warning to the pious.
And when Moses said unto his people, verily God commandeth you to sacrifice a cow; they answered, dost thou make a jest of us? Moses said, God fobid that I should be one of the foolish.
They said, pray for us unto thy Lord, that He would shew us what cow it is. Moses answered, he saith, she is neither an old cow, nor a young heifer, but of a middle age between both: Do ye therefore that which ye are commanded.
They said, pray for us unto thy Lord that he would shew us what colour she is of. Moses answered, he saith, she is a red cow, intensely red, her colour rejoiceth the beholders.
They said, pray for us unto thy Lord, that He would further shew us what cow it is, for several cows with us are like one another, and we, if God please, will be directed.
Moses answered, he saith, she is a cow not broken to plough the earth, or water the field, a found one, there is no blemish in her. They said, now hast thou brought the truth. Then they sacrificed her; yet they wanted but little of leaving it undone.
And when ye slew a man, and contended among your selves concerning him, God brought forth to light that which ye concealed.
For we said, strike the dead body with part of the sacrificed cow: So God raiseth the dead to life, and sheweth you his signs, that peradventure ye may understand.
Then were your hearts hardened after this, even as stones, or exceeding them in hardness: For from some stones have rivers bursted forth, others have been rent in sunder, and water hath issued from them, and others have fallen down for fear of God. But God is not regardless of that which ye do.
Do ye therefore desire that the Jews should believe you? Yet a part of them heard the word of God, and then perverted it, after they had understood it, against their own conscience.
And when they meet the true believers, they say, we believe: But when they are privately assembled together, they say, will ye acquaint them with what God hath revealed unto you, that they may dispute with you concerning it in the presence of your Lord? Do ye not therefore understand?
Do not they know that God knoweth that which they conceal as well as that which they publish?
But there are illiterate men among them, who know not the book of the law, but only lying stories, although they think otherwise.
And woe unto them who transcribe corruptly the book of the law with their hands, and then say, this is from God: That they may sell it for a small price. Therefore woe unto them because of that which their hands have written; and woe unto them for that which they have gained.
They say, the fire of hell shall not touch us but for a certain number of days. Answer, have ye received any promise from God to that purpose? For God will not act contrary to his promise: Or do ye speak concerning God that which ye know not?
Verily who so doth evil, and is encompassed by his iniquity, they shall be the companions of hell fire, they shall remain therein for ever:
But they who believe and do good works, they shall be the companions of paradise, they shall continue therein for ever.
Remember also, when We accepted the covenant of the children of Israel, saying, ye shall not worship any other except God, and ye shall shew kindness to your parents and kindred, and to orphans, and to the poor, and speak that which is good unto men; and be constant at prayer, and give alms. Afterwards ye turned back, except a few of you, and retired afar off.
And when We accepted your covenant, saying, ye shall not shed your brothers blood, nor dispossess one another of your habitations. Then ye confirmed it, and were witnesses thereto.
Afterwards ye were they who slew one another, and turned several of your brethren out of their houses, mutually assisting each other against them with injustice and enmity; but if they come captives unto you, ye redeem them: Yet it is equally unlawful for you to dispossess them. Do ye therefore believe in part of the book of the law, and reject other part thereof? But whoso among you doth this, shall have no other reward than shame in this life, and on the day of resurrection they shall be sent to a most grievous punishment; for God is not regardless of that which ye do.
These are they who have purchased this present life, at the price of that which is to come; wherefore their punishment shall not be mitigated, neither shall they be helped.
We formerly delivered the book of the law unto Moses, and caused Apostles to succeed him, and gave evident miracles to Jesus the son of Mary, and strengthened him with the holy spirit. Do ye therefore, whenever an Apostle cometh unto you with that which your souls desire not, proudly reject him, and accuse some of imposture, and slay others?
The Jews say, our hearts are uncircumcised: But God hath cursed them with their infidelity, therefore few shall believe.
And when a book came unto them from God, confirming the scriptures which were with them, although they had before prayed for assistance against those who believed not, yet when that came unto them which they knew to be from God, they would not believe therein: therefore the curse of God shall be on the infidels.
For a vile price have they sold their souls, that they should not believe in that which God hath sent down; out of envy, because God sendeth down his favours to such of his servants as he pleaseth: Therefore they brought on themselves indignation on indignation; and the unbelievers shall suffer an ignominious punishment.
When one saith unto them, believe in that which God hath sent down; they answer, we believe in that which hath been sent down unto us: And they reject what hath been revealed since, although it be the truth, confirming that which is with them. Say, why therefore have ye slain the prophets of God in times past, if ye be true believers?
Moses formerly came unto you with evident signs, but ye afterwards took the calf for your god and did wickedly.
And when we accepted your covenant and lifted the mountain of Sinai over you, saying, receive the law which we have given you, with a resolution to perform it, and hear; they said, we have heard, and have rebelled: And they were made to drink down the calf into their hearts for their unbelief. Say, a grievous thing hath your faith commanded you, if ye be true believers.
Say, if the future mansion with God be prepared peculiarly for you, exclusive of the rest of mankind, wish for death, if ye say truth:
But they will never wish for it, because of that which their hands have sent before them; God knoweth the wicked doers;
and thou shalt surely find them of all men the most covetous of life, even more than the idolaters: One of them would desire his life to be prolonged a thousand years, but none shall reprieve himself from punishment, that his life may be prolonged: God seeth that which they do.
Say, whoever is an enemy to Gabriel -- for he hath caused the Koran to descend on thy heart, by the permission of God, confirming that which was before revealed, a direction, and good tidings to the faithful; --
whosoever is an enemy to God, or his angels, or his Apostles, or to Gabriel, or Michael, verily God is an enemy to the unbelievers.
And now we have sent down unto thee evident signs, and none will disbelieve them but the evil-doers.
Whenever they make a covenant, will some of them reject it? Yea the greater part of them do not believe.
And when there came unto them an Apostle from God, confirming that scripture which was with them, some of those to whom the scriptures were given, cast the book of God behind their backs, as if they knew it not:
And they followed the device which the devils devised against the kingdom of Solomon; and Solomon was not an unbeliever; but the devils believed not, they taught men sorcery, and that which was sent down to the two angels at Babel, Harut and Marut: Yet those two taught no man until they had said, verily we are a temptation, therefore be not an unbeliever. So men learned from those two a charm by which they might cause division between a man and his wife; but they hurt none thereby, unless by God's permission; and they learned that which would hurt them, and not profit them; and yet they knew that he who bought that art should have no part in the life to come, and woful is the price for which they have sold their souls, if they knew it.
But if they had believed, and feared God, verily the reward they would have had from God, would have been better, if they had known it.
O true believers, say not to our Apostle, Raina; but say Ondhorna; and hearken: The infidels shall suffer a grievous punishment.
It is not the desire of the unbelievers, either among those unto whom the scriptures have been given, or among the idolaters, that any good should be sent down unto you from your Lord: But God will appropriate his mercy unto whom he pleaseth; for God is exceeding beneficent.
Whatever verse we shall abrogate, or cause thee to forget, we will bring a better than it, or one like unto it. Dost thou not know that God is almighty?
Dost thou not know that unto God belongeth the kingdom of heaven and earth? Neither have ye any protector or helper except God.
Will ye require of your Apostle according to that which was formerly required of Moses? But he that hath exchanged faith for infidelity, hath already erred from the strait way.
Many of those unto whom the scriptures have been given, desire to render you again unbelievers, after ye have believed; out of envy from their souls, even after the truth is become manifest unto them; but forgive them, and avoid them, till God shall send his command; for God is omnipotent.
Be constant in prayer, and give alms; and what good ye have sent before for your souls, ye shall find it with God; surely God seeth that which ye do.
They say, verily none shall enter paradise, except they who are Jews or Christians: This is their wish. Say, produce your proof of this, if ye speak truth.
Nay, but he who resigneth himself to God, and doth that which is right, he shall have his reward with his Lord; there shall come no fear on them, neither shall they be grieved.
The Jews say, the Christians are grounded on nothing; and the Christians say, the Jews are grounded on nothing: Yet they both read the scriptures. So likewise say they who know not the scripture, according to their saying. But God shall judge between them on the day of the resurrection, concerning that about which they now disagree.
Who is more unjust than he who prohibiteth the temples of God, that his name should be remembered therin, and who hasteth to destroy them? Those men cannot enter therein, but with fear: They shall have shame in this world, and in the next a grievous punishment.
To God belongeth the east and the west; therefore whithersoever ye turn your selves to pray, there is the face of God; for God is omnipresent and omniscient.
They say, God hath begotten children: God forbid! To him belongeth whatever is in heaven, and on earth; all is possessed by him,
the creator of heaven and earth; and when he decreeth a thing, he only saith unto it, be, and it is.
And they who know not the scriptures say, unless God speak unto us, or thou shew us a sign, we will not believe. So said those before them, according to their saying: Their hearts resemble each other. We have already shewn manifest signs unto people who firmly believe;
we have sent thee in truth, a bearer of good tidings, and a preacher; and thou shalt not be questioned concerning the companions of hell.
But the Jews will not be pleased with thee, neither the Christians, until thou follow their religion; say, the direction of God is the true direction. And verily if thou follow their desires, after the knowledge which hath been given thee, thou shalt find no patron or protector against God.
They to whom we have given the book of the Koran, and who read it with its true reading, they believe therein; and whoever believeth not therein, they shall perish.
O children of Israel, remember my favour wherewith I have favoured you, and that I have preferred you before all nations;
and dread the day wherein one soul shall not make satisfaction for another soul, neither shall any compensation be accepted from them, nor shall any intercession avail, neither shall they be helped.
Remember when the Lord tried Abraham by certain words, which he fulfilled: God said, verily I will constitute thee a model of religion unto mankind; he answered, and also of my posterity; God said, my covenant doth not comprehend the ungodly.
And when we appointed the holy house of Mecca to be a place of resort for mankind, and a place of security; and said, take the station of Abraham for a place of prayer; and we covenanted with Abraham and Ismael, that they should cleanse my house for those who should compass it, and those who should be devoutly assiduous there, and those who should bow down and worship.
And when Abraham said, Lord, make this a territory of security, and bounteously bestow fruits on its inhabitants, such of them as believe in God and the last day; God answered, and whoever believeth not, I will bestow on him little, afterwards I will drive him to the punishment of hellfire; an ill journey shall it be!
And when Abraham and Ismael raised the foundations of the house, saying, Lord, accept it from us, for thou art he who heareth and knoweth:
Lord, make us also resigned unto thee, and of our posterity a people resigned unto thee, and shew us our holy ceremonies, and be turned unto us, for thou art easy to be reconciled, and merciful:
Lord, send them likewise an Apostle from among them, who may declare thy signs unto them, and teach them the book of the Koran and wisdom, and may purify them; for thou art mighty and wise.
Who will be averse to the religion of Abraham, but he whose mind is infatuated? Surely we have chosen him in this world, and in that which is to come he shall be one of the righteous.
When his Lord said unto him, resign thy self unto me; he answered, I have resigned my self unto the Lord of all creatures.
And Abraham bequeathed this religion to his children, and Jacob did the same, saying, my children, verily God hath chosen this religion for you, therefore die not, unless ye also be resigned.
Were ye present when Jacob was at the point of death? When he said to his sons, whom will ye worship after me? They answered, we will worship thy God, and the God of thy fathers Abraham, and Ismael, and Isaac, one God, and to him will we be resigned.
That people are now passed away, they have what they have gained, and ye shall have what ye gain; and ye shall not be questioned concerning that which they have done.
They say, become Jews or Christians that ye may be directed. Say, nay, we follow the religion of Abraham the orthodox, who was no idolater.
Say, we believe in God, and that which hath been sent down unto us, and that which hath been sent down unto Abraham, and Ismael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the tribes, and that which was delivered unto Moses, and Jesus, and that which was delivered unto the prophets from their Lord: We make no distinction between any of them, and to God are we resigned.
Now if they believe according to what ye believe, they are surely directed, but if they turn back, they are in schism. God shall support thee against them, for he is the hearer, the wise.
The baptism of God have we received, and who it better than God to baptize? Him do we worship.
Say, will ye dispute with us concernig God, who is our Lord, and your Lord? We have our works, and ye have your works, and unto him are we sincerely devoted.
Will ye say, truly Abraham, and Ismael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the tribes were Jews or Christians? Say, are ye wiser, or God? And who is more unjust than he who hideth the testimony which he hath received from God? But God is not regardless of that which ye do.
That people are passed away, they have what they have gained, and ye shall have what ye gain, nor shall ye be questioned concerning that which they have done.
The foolish men will say, what hath turned them from their Keblah, towards which they formerly prayed? Say, unto God belongeth the east and the west: He directeth whom he pleaseth into the right way.
Thus have we placed you, O Arabians, an intermediate nation, that ye may be witnesses against the rest of mankind, and that the Apostle may be a witness against you. We appointed the Keblah towards which thou didst formerly pray, only that we might know him who followeth the Apostle, from him who turneth back on his heel; though this change seem a great matter, unless unto those whom God hath directed. But God will not render your faith of none effect; for God is gracious and merciful unto man.
We have seen thee turn about thy face towards heaven with uncertainty, but we will cause thee to turn thy self towards a Keblah that will please thee. Turn therefore thy face towards the holy temple of Mecca; and wherever ye be, turn your faces towards that place. They to whom the scripture hath been given, know this to be truth from their Lord. God is not regardless of that which ye do.
Verily although thou shouldest shew unto those to whom the scripture hath been given, all kinds of signs, yet they will not follow thy Keblah, neither shalt thou follow their Keblah; nor will one part of them follow the Keblah of the other. And if thou follow their desires, after the knowledge which hath been given thee, verily thou wilt become one of the ungodly.
They to whom we have given the scripture know our apostle, even as they know their own children; but some of them hide the truth, against their own knowledge.
Truth is from thy Lord, therefore thou shalt not doubt.
Every sect hath a certain tract of heaven to which they turn themselves in prayer; but for ye strive to run after good things: Wherever ye be, God will bring you all back at the resurrection, for God is almighty.
And from what place soever thou comest forth, turn thy face towards the holy temple; for this is truth from thy Lord; neither is God regardless of that which ye do.
From what place soever thou comest forth, turn thy face towards the holy temple; and wherever ye be, thitherward turn your faces, lest men have matter of dispute against you; but as for those among them who are unjust doers, fear them not, but fear me, that I may accomplish my grace upon you, and that ye may be directed.
As we have sent unto you an apostle from among you, to rehearse our signs unto you, and to purify you, and to teach you the book of the Koran and wisdom, and to teach you that which ye knew not:
Therefore remember me, and I will remember you, and give thanks unto me, and be not unbelievers.
O true believers, beg assistance with patience and prayer, for God is with the patient.
And say not of those who are slain in fight for the religion of God, that they are dead; yea, they are living: But ye do not understand.
We will surely prove you by afflicting you in some measure with fear, and hunger, and decrease of wealth, and loss of lives, and scarcity of fruits: But bear good tidings unto the patient,
who when a misfortune befalleth them, say, we are God's, and unto him shall we surely return.
Upon them shall be blessings from their Lord and mercy, and they are the rightly directed.
Moreover Safa and Merwah are two of the monuments of God: Whoever therefore goeth on pilgrimage to the temple of Mecca or visiteth it, it shall be no crime in him if he compass them both. And as for him who voluntarily performeth a good work; verily God is grateful and knowing.
They who conceal any of the evident signs, or the direction which we have sent down, after what we have manifested unto men in the scripture, God shall curse them; and they who curse shall curse them.
But as for those who repent and amend, and make known what they concealed, I will be turned unto them, for I am easy to be reconciled and merciful.
Surely they who believe not, and die in their unbelief, upon them shall be the curse of God, and of the angels, and of all men;
they shall remain under it for ever, their punishment shall not be alleviated, neither shall they be regarded.
Your God is one God, there is no God but He, the most merciful.
Now in the creation of heaven and earth, and the vicissitude of night and day, and in the ship which saileth in the sea, loaden with what is profitable for mankind, and in the rain water which God sendeth from heaven, quickening thereby the dead earth, and replenishing the same with all sorts of cattle, and in the change of winds, and the clouds that are compelled to do service between heaven and earth, are signs to people of understanding:
Yet some men take idols beside God, and love them as with the love due to God; but the true believers are more fervent in love towards God. Oh that they who act unjustly did perceive, when they behold their punishment, that all power belongeth unto God, and that he is severe in punishing!
When those who have been followed, shall separate themselves from their followers, and shall see the punishment, and the cords of relation between them shall be cut in sunder;
the followers shall say, if we could return to life, we would separate our selves from them, as they have now separated themselves from us. So God will shew them their works; they shall sigh grievously and shall not come forth from the fire of hell.
O men, eat of that which is lawful and good on the earth; and tread not in the steps of the devil, for he is your open enemy.
Verily he commandeth you evil and wickedness, and that ye should say that of God which ye know not.
And when it is said unto them who believe not, follow that which God hath sent down; they answer, nay, but we will follow that which we found our fathers practise. What? Though their fathers knew nothing, and were not rightly directed?
The unbelievers are like unto one who crieth aloud to that which heareth not so much as his calling, or the sound of his voice. They are deaf, dumb, and blind, therefore do they not understand.
O true believers, eat of the good things which we have bestowed on you for food, and return thanks unto God, if ye serve him.
Verily he hath forbidden you to eat that which dieth of itself, and blood, and swine's flesh, and that on which any other name but God's hath been invocated. But he who is forced by necessity, not lusting, nor returning to transgress, it shall be no crime in him if he eat of those things, for God is gracious and merciful.
Moreover they who conceal any part of the scripture which God hath sent down unto them, and sell it for a small price, they shall swallow into their bellies nothing but fire; God shall not speak unto them on the day of resurrection, neither shall he purify them, and they shall suffer a grievous punishment.
These are they who have sold direction for error, and pardon for punishment: But how great will their suffering be in the fire!
This they shall endure, because God sent down the book of the Koran with truth, and they who disagree concerning that book, are certainly in a wide mistake.
It is not righteousness that ye turn your faces in prayer towards the east and the west, but righteousness is of him who believeth in God and the last day, and the angels, and the scriptures, and the prophets; who giveth money for God's sake unto his kindred, and unto orphans, and the needy, and the stranger, and those who ask, and for redemption of captives; who is constant at prayer, and giveth alms; and of those who perform their covenant, when they have covenanted, and who behave themselves patiently in adversity, and hardships, and in time of violence: These are they who are true, and these are they who fear God.
O true believers, the law of retaliation is ordained you for the slain: The free shall die for the free, and the servant for the servant, and a woman for a woman: But he whom his brother shall forgive, may be prosecuted, and obliged to make satisfaction according to what is just, and a fine shall be set on him with humanity. This is indulgence from your Lord, and mercy. And he who shall transgress after this, by killing the murderer, shall suffer a grievous punishment.
And in this law of retaliation ye have life, O ye of understanding, that peradventure ye may fear.
It is ordained you, when any of you is at the point of death, if he leave any goods, that he bequeath a legacy to his parents, and kindred, according to what shall be reasonable. This is a duty incumbent on those who fear God.
But he who shall change the legacy, after he hath heard it bequeathed by the dying person, surely the sin thereof shall be on those who change it, for God is he who heareth and knoweth.
Howbeit he who apprehendeth from the testator any mistake or injustice, and shall compose the matter between them, that shall be no crime in him, for God is gracious and merciful.
O true believers, a fast is ordained you, as it was ordained unto those before you, that ye may fear God.
A certain number of days shall ye fast: But he among you who shall be sick, or on a journey, shall fast an equal number of other days. And those who can keep it, and do not, must redeem their neglect by maintaining of a poor man. And he who voluntarily dealeth better with the poor man than he is obliged, this shall be better for him. But if ye fast it will be better for you, if ye knew it.
The month of Ramadan shall ye fast, in which the Koran was sent down from heaven, a direction unto men, and declarations of direction, and the distinction between good and evil. Therefore let him among you who shall be present in this month, fast the same month; but he who shall be sick, or on a journey, shall fast the like number of other days. God would make this an ease unto you, and would not make it a difficulty unto you; that ye may fulfill the number of days, and glorify God, for that he hath directed you, and that ye may give thanks.
When my servants ask thee concerning me, verily I am near; I will hear the prayer of him that prayeth, when he prayeth unto me: But let them hearken unto me, and believe in me, that they may be rightly directed.
It is lawful for you on the night of the fast to go in unto your wives; they are a garment unto you, and ye are a garment unto them. God knoweth that ye defraud your selves therein, wherefore he turneth unto you, and forgiveth you. Now therefore go in unto them; and earnestly desire that which God ordaineth you, and eat and drink until ye can plainly distinguish a white thread from a black thread by the day-break: Then keep the fast until night, and go not in unto them, but be constantly present in the places of worship. These are the prescribed bounds of God, therefore draw not near them to transgress them. Thus God declareth his signs unto men, that they may fear him.
Consume not your wealth among your selves in vain; nor present it unto judges, that ye may devour part of men's substance unjustly, against your own consciences.
They will ask thee concerning the phases of the moon: Answer, they are times appointed unto men, and to shew the season of the pilgrimage to Mecca. It is not righteousness that ye enter your houses by the back parts thereof, but righteousness is of him who feareth God. Therefore enter your houses by their doors; and fear God, that ye may be happy.
And fight for the religion of God against those who fight against you, but transgress not by attacking them first, for God loveth not the transgressors.
And kill them wherever ye find them, and turn them out of that whereof they have dispossessed you, for temptation to idolatry is more grievous than slaughter: Yet fight not against them in the holy temple, until they attack you therein; but if they attack you, slay them there. This shall be the reward of the infidels.
But if they desist, God is gracious and merciful.
Fight therefore against them, until there be no temptation to idolatry, and the religion be God's: But if they desist, then let there be no hostility, except against the ungodly.
A sacred month for a sacred month, and the holy limits of Mecca, if they attack you therein, do ye also attack them therein in retaliation; and whoever transgresseth against you by so doing, do ye transgress against him in like manner as he hath transgressed against you, and fear God, and know that God is with those who fear him.
Contribute out of your substance toward the defence of the religion of God, and throw not your selves with your own hands into perdition; and do good, for God loveth those who do good.
Perform the pilgrimage of Mecca, and the visitation of God: And if ye be besieged, send that offering which shall be the easiest; and shave not your heads, until your offering reacheth the place of sacrifice. But whoever among you is sick, or is troubled with any distemper of the head, must redeem the shaving his head by fasting, or alms, or some offering. When ye are secure from enemies, he who tarrieth in the visitation of the temple of Mecca until the pilgrimage, shall bring that offering which shall be the easiest. But he who findeth not any thing to offer, shall fast three days in the pilgrimage, and seven when ye are returned: They shall be ten days complete. This is incumbent on him, whose family shall not be present at the holy temple. And fear God and know that God is severe in punishing.
The pilgrimage must be performed in the known months; whosoever therefore purposeth to go on pilgrimage therein, let him not know a woman, nor transgress, nor quarrel in the pilgrimage. The good which ye do, God knoweth it. Make provision for your journey; but the best provision is piety: And fear me, O ye of understanding.
It shall be no crime in you, if ye seek an increase from your Lord, by trading during the pilgrimage. And when ye go in procession from Arafat, remember God near the holy monument; and remember him for that he hath directed you, although ye were before this of the number of those who go astray.
Therefore go in procession from whence the people go in procession, and ask pardon of God, for God is gracious and merciful.
And when ye have finished your holy ceremonies, remember God, according as ye remember your fathers, or with a more reverend commemoration. There are some men who say, O Lord, give us our portion in this world; but such shall have no portion in the next life:
And there are others who say, O Lord, give us good in this world, and also good in the next world, and deliver us from the torment of hell fire.
They shall have a portion of that which they have gained: God is swift in taking an account.
Remember God the appointed number of days: But if any haste to depart from the valley of Mina in two days, it shall be no crime in him. And if any tarry longer, it shall be no crime in him, in him who feareth God. Therefore fear God, and know that unto him ye shall be gathered.
There is a man who causeth thee to marvel by his speech concerning this present life, and calleth God to witness that which is in his heart, yet he is most intent in opposing thee;
and when he turneth away from thee, he hasteth to act corruptly in the earth, and to destroy that which is sown, and springeth up: But God loveth not corrupt doing.
And if one say unto him, fear God; pride seizeth him, together with wickedness; but hell shall be his reward, and an unhappy couch shall it be.
There is also a man who selleth his soul for the sake of those things which are pleasing unto God; and God is gracious unto his servants.
O true believers, enter into the true religion wholly, and follow not the steps of Satan, for he is your open enemy.
If ye have slipped after the declarations of our will have come unto you, know that God is mighty and wise.
Do the infidels expect less than that God should come down to them overshadowed with clouds, and the angels also? But the thing is decreed, and to God shall all things return.
Ask the children of Israel how many evident signs we have shewed them; and whoever shall change the grace of God, after it shall have come unto him, verily God will be severe in punishing him.
The present life was ordained for those who believe not, and they laugh the faithful to scorn; but they who fear God shall be above them, on the day of the resurrection: For God is bountiful unto whom he pleaseth without measure.
Mankind was of one faith, and God sent prophets bearing good tidings, and denouncing threats, and sent down with them the scripture in truth, that it might judge between men of that concerning which they disagreed: And none disagreed concerning it, except those to whom the same scriptures were delivered, after the declarations of God's will had come unto them, out of envy among themselves. And God directed those who believed, to that truth concerning which they disagreed, by his will: For God directeth whom he pleaseth into the right way.
Did ye think ye should enter paradise, when as yet no such thing had happened unto you, as hath happened unto those who have been before you? They suffered calamity, and tribulation, and were afflicted; so that the apostle, and they who believed with him, said; when will the help of God come? Is not the help of God nigh?
They will ask thee what they shall bestow in alms: Answer, the good which ye bestow, let it be given to parents, and kindred, and orphans, and the poor, and the stranger. Whatsoever good ye do, God knoweth it.
War is enjoined you against the infidels; but this is hateful unto you: Yet perchance ye hate a thing which is better for you, and perchance ye love a thing which is worse for you: But God knoweth and ye know not.
They will ask thee concerning the sacred month, whether they may war therein: Answer, to war therein is grievous; but to obstruct the way of God, and infidelity towards him, and to keep men from the holy temple, and to drive out his people from thence, is more grievous in the sight of God, and the temptation to idolatry is more grievous than to kill in the sacred months. They will not cease to war against you, until they turn you from your religion, if they be able: But whoever among you shall turn back from his religion, and die an infidel, their works shall be vain in this world, and the next; they shall be the companions of hell fire, they shall remain therein for ever.
But they who believe, and who fly for the sake of religion, and fight in God's cause, they shall hope for the mercy of God; for God is gracious and merciful.
They will ask thee concerning wine and lots: Answer, in both there is great sin, and also some things of use unto men; but their sinfulness is greater than their use. They will ask thee also what they shall bestow in alms: Answer, what ye have to spare. Thus God sheweth his signs unto you, that peradventure ye might seriously think
of this present world, and of the next. They will also ask thee concerning orphans: Answer, to deal righteously with them is best and if ye intermeddle with the management of what belongs to them, do them no wrong; they are your brethren: God knoweth the corrupt dealer from the righteous; and if God please, he will surely distress you, for God is mighty and wise.
Marry not women who are idolaters, until they believe: Verily a maid servant who believeth, is better than an idolatress, although she please you more. And give not women who believe, in marriage to the idolaters, until they believe; for verily a servant, who is a true believer, is better than an idolater, though he please you more. They invite unto hell fire, but God inviteth unto paradise and pardon through his will, and declareth his signs unto men, that they may remember.
They will ask thee also, concerning the courses of women: Answer, they are a pollution: Therefore separate your selves from women in their courses, and go not near them, until they be cleansed. But when they are cleansed, go in unto them as God hath commanded you, for God loveth those who repent, and loveth those who are clean.
Your wives are your tillage; go in therefore unto your tillage in what manner soever ye will: And do first some act that may be profitable unto your souls; and fear God, and know that ye must meet him; and bear good tidings unto the faithful.
Make not God the object of your oaths, that ye will deal justly, and be devout, and make peace among men; for God is he who heareth and knoweth.
God will not punish you for an inconsiderate word in your oaths; but he will punish you for that which your hearts have assented unto: God is merciful and gracious.
They who vow to abstain from their wives, are allowed to wait four months: But if they go back from their vow, verily God is gracious and merciful;
and if they resolve on a divorce, God is he who heareth and knoweth.
The women who are divorced shall wait concerning themselves until they have their courses thrice, and it shall not be lawful for them to conceal that which God hath created in their wombs, if they believe in God and the last day; and their husbands will act more justly to bring them back at this time, if they desire a reconciliation. The women ought also to behave towards their husbands in like manner as their husbands should behave towards them, according to what is just: But the men ought to have a superiority over them. God is mighty and wise.
Ye may divorce your wives twice; and then either retain them with humanity, or dismiss them with kindness. But it is not lawful for you to take away any thing of what ye have given them, unless both fear that they cannot observe the ordinances of God. And if ye fear that they cannot observe the ordinances of God, it shall be no crime in either of them of account of that for which the wife shall redeem her self. These are the ordinances of God; therefore transgress them not; for whoever transgresseth the ordinances of God, they are unjust doers.
But if the husband divorce her a third time, she shall not be lawful for him again, until she marry another husband. But if he also divorce her, it shall be no crime in them, if they return to each other, if they think they can observe the ordinances of God; and these are the ordinances of God, he declareth them to people of understanding.
But when ye divorce women, and they have fulfilled their prescribed time, either retain them with humanity, or dismiss them with kindness; and retain them not by violence, so that ye transgress; for he who doth this, surely injureth his own soul. And make not the signs of God a jest: But remember God's favour towards you, and that he hath sent down unto you the book of the Koran, and wisdom, admonishing you thereby; and fear God, and know that God is omniscient.
But when ye have divorced your wives, and they have fulfilled their prescribed time, hinder them not from marrying their husbands, when they have agreed among themselves according to what is honourable. This is given in admonition unto him among you who believeth in God, and the last day. This is most righteous for you, and most pure. God knoweth, but ye know not.
Mothers after they are divorced shall give suck unto their children two full years, to him who desireth the time of giving suck to be completed; and the father shall be obliged to maintain them and cloath them in the mean time, according to that which shall be reasonable. No person shall be obliged beyond his ability. A mother shall not be compelled to what is unreasonable on account of her child, nor a father on account of his child. And the heir of the father shall be obliged to do in like manner. But if they choose to wean the child before the end of two years, by common consent, and on mutual consideration, it shall be no crime in them. And if ye have a mind to provide a nurse for your children, it shall be no crime in you, in case ye fully pay what ye offer her, according to that which is just. And fear God, and know that God seeth whatsoever ye do.
Such of you as die, and leave wives, their wives must wait concerning themselves four months and ten days, and when they shall have fulfilled their term, it shall be no crime in you, for that which they shall do with themselves, according to what is reasonable. God well knoweth that which ye do.
And it shall be no crime in you, whether ye make public overtures of marriage unto such women, within the said four months and ten days, or whether ye conceal such your designs in your minds: God knoweth that ye will remember them. But make no promise unto them privately, unless ye speak honourable words; and resolve not on the knot of marriage, until the prescribed time be accomplished; and know that God knoweth that which is in your minds, therefore beware of him, and know that God is gracious and merciful.
It shall be no crime in you, if ye divorce your wives, so long as ye have not touched them, nor settled any dowry on them. And provide for them -- he who is at his ease must provide according to his circumstances, and he who is straitened according to his circumstances -- necessaries, according to what shall be reasonable. This is a duty incumbent on the righteous.
But if ye divorce them before ye have touched them, and have already settled a dowry on them, ye shall give them half of what ye have settled, unless they release any part, or he release part in whose hand the knot of marriage is; and if ye release the whole, it will approach nearer unto piety. And forget not liberality among you, for God seeth that which ye do.
Carefully observe the appointed prayers, and the middle prayer, and be assiduous therein, with devotion towards God.
But if ye fear any danger, pray on foot or on horseback; and when ye are safe, remember God, how he hath taught you what as yet ye knew not.
And such of you as shall die and leave wives, ought to bequeath their wives a year's maintenance, without putting them out of their houses: But if they go out voluntarily, it shall be no crime in you, for that which they shall do with themselves, according to what shall be reasonable; God is mighty and wise.
And unto those who are divorced, a reasonable provision is also due; this is a duty incumbent on those who fear God.
Thus God declareth his signs unto you, that ye may understand.
Hast thou not considered those, who left their habitations, -- and they were thousands -- for fear of death? And God said unto them, die; then he restored them to life, for God is gracious towards mankind; but the greater part of men do not give thanks.
Fight for the religion of God, and know that God is he who heareth and knoweth.
Who is he that will lend unto God on good usury? Verily he will double it unto him manifold; for God contracteth and extendeth his hand as he pleaseth, and to him shall ye return.
Hast thou not considered the assembly of the children of Israel, after the time of Moses; when they said unto their prophet Samual, set a king over us, that we may fight for the religion of God? The prophet answered, if ye are enjoined to go to war, will ye be near refusing to fight? They answered, and what should ail us that we should not fight for the religion of God, seeing we are dispossessed of our habitations, and deprived of our children? But when they were enjoined to go to war, they turned back, except a few of them: And God knew the ungodly.
And their prophet said unto them, verily God hath set Jalut, king over you: They answered, how shall he reign over us, seeing we are more worthy of the kingdom than he, neither is he possessed of great riches? Samual said, verily God hath chosen him before you, and hath caused him to increase in knowledge and stature, for God giveth his kingdom unto whom he pleaseth; God is bounteous and wise.
And their prophet said unto them, verily the sign of his kingdom shall be, that the ark shall come unto you; Therein shall be tranquility from your Lord, and the relics which have been left by the family of Moses, and the family of Aaron; the angels shall bring it. Verily this shall be a sign unto you, if ye believe.
And when Jalut departed with his soldiers, he said, verily God will prove you by the river: For he who drinketh thereof, shall not be on my side -- but he who shall not taste thereof he shall be on my side -- except he who drinketh a draught out of his hand. And they drank thereof, except a few of them. And when they had passed the river, he and those who believed with him, they said, we have no strength to day, against Jalut and his forces. But they who considered that they should meet God at the resurrection, said, how often hath a small army discomfited a great army, by the will of God? And God is with those who patiently persevere.
And when they went forth to battle against Jalut and his forces, they said, O Lord, pour on us patience, and confirm our feet, and help us against the unbelieving people.
Therefore they discomfited them, by the will of God, and David slew Jalut. And God gave him the kingdom and wisdom, and taught him his will, and if God had not prevented men, the one by the other, verily the earth had been corrupted: But God is beneficent towards his creatures.
These are the signs of God: We rehearse them unto thee with truth, and thou art surely one of those who have been sent by God.
These are the apostles; we have preferred some of them before others: Some of them hath God spoken unto, and hath exalted the degree of others of them. And we gave unto Jesus the son of Mary manifest signs, and strengthened him with the holy spirit. And if God had pleased, they who came after those apostles, would not have contended among themselves, after manifest signs had been shewn unto them. But they fell to variance; therefore some of them believed, and some of them believed not; and if God had so pleased, they would not have contended among themselves, but God doth what he will.
O true believers, give alms of that which we have bestowed on you, before the day cometh wherein there shall be no merchandizing, nor friendship, nor intercession. The infidels are unjust doers.
God! There is no God but he; the living, the self-subsisting: Neither slumber nor sleep seizeth him; to him belongeth whatsoever is in heaven, and on earth. Who is he that can intercede with him, but through his good pleasure? He knoweth that which is past, and that which is to come unto them, and they shall not comprehend any thing of his knowledge, but so far as he pleaseth. His throne is extended over heaven and earth, and the preservation of both is no burden unto him. He is the high, the mighty.
Let there be no violence in religion. Now is right direction manifestly distinguished from deceit: Whoever therefore shall deny Tagut(false gods), and believe in God, he shall surely take hold on a strong handle, which shall not be broken; God is he who heareth and seeth.
God is the patron of those who believe; he shall lead them out of darkness into light: But as to those who believe not, their patrons are Tagut(false gods); they shall lead them from the light into darkness; they shall be the companions of hell fire, they shall remain therein for ever.
Hast thou not considered him who disputed with Abraham concerning his Lord, because God had given him the kingdom? When Abraham said, my Lord is he who giveth life, and killeth: He answered, I give life, and I kill. Abraham said, verily God bringeth the sun from the east, now do thou bring it from the west. Whereupon the infidel was confounded; for God directeth not the ungoldly people.
Or hast thou not considered how he behaved who passed by a city which had been destroyed, even to her foundations? He said, how shall God quicken this city, after she hath been dead? And God caused him to die for an hundred years, and afterwards raised him to life. And God said, how long hast thou tarried here? He answered, a day, or part of a day. God said, nay, thou hast tarried here an hundred years. Now look on thy food and thy drink, they are not yet corrupted; and look on thine ass: And this have we done that we might make thee a sign unto men. And look on the bones of thine ass, how we raise them, and afterwards cloath them with flesh. And when this was shewn unto him, he said, I know that God is able to do all things.
And when Abraham said, O Lord, shew me how thou wilt raise the dead; God said, dost thou not yet believe? He answered, yea; but I ask this that my heart may rest at ease. God said, take therefore four birds, and divide them; then lay a part of them on every mountain; then call them, and they shall come swiftly unto thee: And know that God is mighty and wise.
The similitude of those who lay out their substance for advancing the religion of God, is as a grain of corn which produceth seven ears, and in every ear an hundred grains; for God giveth twofold unto whom he pleaseth: God is bounteous and wise.
They who lay out their substance for the religion of God, and afterwards follow not what they have so laid out by reproaches or mischief, they shall have their reward with their Lord; upon them shall no fear come, neither shall they be grieved.
A fait speech, and to forgive, is better than alms followed by mischief. God is rich and merciful.
O true believers, make not your alms of none effect by reproaching, or mischief, as he who layeth out what he hath to appear unto men to give alms, and believeth not in God and the last day. The likeness of such a one, is as a flint covered with earth, on which a violent rain falleth, and leaveth it hard. They cannot prosper in any thing which they have gained, for God directeth not the unbelieving people.
And the likeness of those who lay out their substance from a desire to please God, and for an establishment for their souls, is as a garden on a hill, on which a violent rain falleth, and it bringeth forth its fruits twofold; and if a violent rain falleth not on it, yet the dew falleth thereon: And God seeth that which ye do.
Doth any of you desire to have a garden of palm-trees and vines, through which rivers flow, wherein he may have all kinds of fruits, and that he may attain to old age, and have a weak off-spring? Then a violent fiery wind shall strike it, so that it shall be burned. Thus God declareth his signs unto you, that ye may consider.
O true believers bestow alms of the good things which ye have gained, and of that which we have produced for you out of the earth, and choose not the bad thereof, to give it in alms, such as ye would not accept your selves, otherwise than by connivance: And know that God is rich and worthy to be praised.
The devil threateneth you with poverty, and commandeth you filthy covetousness, but God promiseth you pardon from himself and abundance: God bounteous and wise.
He giveth wisdom unto whom he pleaseth, and he unto whom wisdom is given, hath received much good: But none will consider, except the wise of heart.
And whatever alms ye shall give, or whatever vow ye shall vow, verily God knoweth it; but the ungodly shall have none to help them.
If ye make your alms to appear, it is well; but if ye conceal them, and give them unto the poor, this will be better for you, and will atone for your sins: And God is well informed of that which ye do.
The direction of them belongeth not unto thee; but God directeth whom he pleaseth. The good that ye shall give in alms shall redound unto your selves; and ye shall not give unless out of desire of seeing the face of God. And what good thing ye shall give in alms, it shall be repaid you, and ye shall not be treated unjustly;
unto the poor who are wholly employed in fighting for the religion of God, and cannot go to and fro in the earth; whom the ignorant man thinketh rich, because of their modesty: Thou shalt know them by this mark, they ask not men with importunity; and what good ye shall give in alms, verily God knoweth it.
They who distribute alms of their substance night and day, in private and in public, shall have their reward with their Lord; on them shall no fear come, neither shall they be grieved.
They who devour usury shall not arise from the dead, but as he ariseth whom Satan hath infected by a touch: This shall happen to them because they say. Truly selling is but as usury: And yet God hath permitted selling and forbidden usury. He therefore who when there cometh unto him an admonition from his Lord, abstaineth from usury for the future, shall have what is past forgiven him, and his affair belongeth unto God. But whoever returneth to usury, they shall be the companions of hell fire, they shall continue therein for ever.
God shall take his blessing from usury, and shall increase alms: For God loveth no infidel, or ungodly person.
But they who believe and do that which is right, and observe the stated times of prayer, and pay their legal alms, they shall have their reward with their Lord: There shall come no fear on them, neither shall they be grieved.
O true believers, fear God, and remit that which remaineth of usury, if ye really believe;
but if ye do it not, hearken unto war, which is declared against you from God and his apostle: Yet if ye repent, ye shall have the capital of your money. Deal not unjustly with others, and ye shall not be dealt with unjustly.
If there be an debtor under a difficulty of paying his debt, let his creditor wait till it be easy for him to do it; but if ye remit it as alms, it will be better for you, if ye knew it.
And fear the day wherein ye shall return unto God, then shall every soul be paid what it hath gained, and they shall not be treated unjustly.
O true believers, when ye bind yourselves one to the other in a debt for a certain time, write it down; and let a writer write between you according to justice, and let not the writer refuse writing according to what God hath taught him; but let him write, and let him who oweth the debt dictate, and let him fear God his Lord, and not diminish ought thereof. But if he who oweth the debt be foolish, or weak, or be not able to dictate himself, let his agent dictate according to equity; and call to witness two witnesses of your neighbouring men; but if there be not two men, let there be a man and two women of those whom ye shall choose for witnesses: If one of those women should mistake, the other of them will cause her to recollect. And the witnesses shall not refuse, whensoever they shall be called. And disdain not to write it down, be it a large debt, or be it a small one, until its time of payment: This will be more just in the sight of God, and more right for bearing witness, and more easy, that ye may not doubt. But if it be a present bargain which ye transact between your selves, it shall be no crime in you, if ye write it not down. And take witnesses when ye sell one to the other, and let no harm be done to the writer, nor to the witness; which if ye do, it will surely be injustice in you: And fear God, and God will instruct you, for God knoweth all things.
And if ye be on a journey, and find no writer, let pledges be taken: But if one of you trust the other, let him who is trusted return what he is trusted with, and fear God his Lord. And conceal not the testimony, for he who concealeth it, hath surely a wicked heart: God knoweth that which ye do.
Whatever is in heaven, and on earth is God's: And whether ye manifest that which is in your minds, or conceal it, God will call you to account for it, and will forgive whom he pleaseth, and will punish whom he pleaseth; for God is almighty.
The apostle believeth in that which hath been sent down unto him from his Lord, and the faithful also. Every one of them believeth in God, and his angels, and his scriptures, and his apostles: We make no distinction at all between his apostles. And they say, we have heard, and do obey: We implore thy mercy, O Lord, for unto thee must we return.
God will not force any soul beyond its capacity: It shall have the good which it gaineth, and it shall suffer the evil which it gaineth. O Lord punisth us not, if we forget, or act sinfully: O Lord lay not on us a burden like that which thou hast laid on those who have been before us; neither make us, O Lord, to bear what we have not strength to bear, but be favourable unto us, and spare us, and be merciful unto us. Thou art our patron, help us therefore against the unbelieving nations.